---
title: Citizen Science in Maryland
date: 2019-11-19 16:05:00 -05:00
published: false
---

Since 1970, DAI has worked in 160 countries on topics that range from good governance, to environmental issues. But what about scientific policy-oriented initiatives in our back yard? With a headquarters in Bethesda, Maryland, DAI is surrounded by a vibrant and diverse social and ecological community, and civil society organizations who care about sustainable development. At the Center for Digital Acceleration (CDA), we’ve had the good fortune of engaging two such organizations - Spa Creek Conservancy (SCC) and the Environmental Center at Anne Arundel Community College (AACC) - who combine formal academic research with citizen science, and use data to bring awareness to the health of the Chesapeake Bay watershed. 

One of many organizations dedicated to Maryland rivers, SCC supports a variety of advocacy, education, and research initiatives for the Spa Creek watershed, a section of creek that spans the historic downtown Annapolis, Eastport, and the surrounding area. Spa Creek provides recreational opportunities for thousands of boaters, fishermen, and site seers each year. And with development in the region booming, it, like many coastal regions, face growing threats to the local ecosystem. 
According to SCC director Donna Jefferson, the organization was founded because “ “.  As an organization, their goals are to clean up the creek from the headwaters to Severn River, educate residents about the link between human lifestyles and the health of the watershed, reduce pollution, and identify sources of damage to the water shed through data collection and research. To accomplish this, SCC works in coordination with AACC’s Environmental Center, who, since 1980, has conducted research designed to address local environmental issues. Led by Professor Tammy Domanski, the Center consults with conservation organizations about their goals, provides laboratory water testing services, equipment, and training to networks of volunteer. In the case of SCC, one of their interests is in using data to tell the story of the environment, and hopefully to get city and county planners to take data into consideration with thinking about permits for buildings and other construction projects. So how is all of this data managed?

## Weekly Data Collection

Because this data is based on the collection of physical samples, SCC coordinates a network of volunteers who visit 17 sites on a weekly basis. Samples are sent to the AACC lab for testing and analyzed by Professor Tammy Domanski and her team, checking carefully for accuracy and outliers. Data analysis focuses on Enterococci and other parameters including clarity, dissolve, oxygen, salinity, pH, and nutrient levels. 
 
I asked Professor Domanski about the role of the citizen scientist, and she highlighted a shift in the perception of volunteer networks, noting that “trained volunteers can generate data that is just as precise and accurate as paid technicians.” She also noted the proliferation of websites dedicated to information sharing and environmental advocacy. “These data points are useful and significant,” she noted. “Historically, there were not enough places to put data that were open to the public. Now, there are a large number of advertised ways to visualize data. What there is not is any coordination between any of them.” So how do organizations like SCC and AACC manage their data, and what are their challenges?

## Creating Useful Data Analysis for Multiple Audiences

Like many organizations, SCC and its regional counterparts use a combination of paper and electronic tools to share data, and created a spreadsheet-based data management system. But according to Domanski, the process with technology hasn’t always been encouraging. “We spend so much time trying to compare systems that have a number of redundancies. We know there are gaps in the information we are putting out there. But we spend so much time looking at redundant layers of information. It’s hard to even know what we’re missing.” 

In Summer 2019, our team the Center for Digital Acceleration connected with SCC and AACC to support their growing amount of data and desire for more robust analysis. Taking a human centered approach to the problem, we developed an analytical platform that integrates with their existing database, and immediate real-time geographic, temporal, and multivariate analysis on data collected. The analytical products are used to immediately communicate water safety to community members via social media, and more in-depth analysis for those interested in learning about specific sites and factors.
