---
title: 6 Tips for Making Great Monitoring and Evaluation Dashboards
date: 2019-01-07 11:04:00 -05:00
---

Technology and data are converging in ways that allow monitoring and evaluation (M&E) professionals to more effectively monitor, evaluate, learn, and adapt on their projects. Dashboards are one of the key tools contributing to this trend, having become more accessible and user friendly through platforms like [Microsoft PowerBI](https://powerbi.microsoft.com/en-us/get-started/?&OCID=AID719832_SEM_bHb24t0B&lnkd=Google_PowerBI_Brand&gclid=Cj0KCQjw08XeBRC0ARIsAP_gaQBWS9woBxKkiDNWqYJ1QffUY7fpDoUDQTRkOS4N15amKTJGVg8EmGMaAkDrEALw_wcB). Dashboards are **an information management tool that visually track, analyze, and display metrics and data points to monitor the status of a project.**  DAI is creating dashboards for all new projects to enable teams to learn, evaluate, and adapt to project realities in near real-time.  Ultimately, these dashboards make for better monitoring and evaluation and in turn better projects.  Therefore, it's important to get it right.  So where should you start?

1. **Define the purpose for the dashboard**
   Dashboards can be designed for different purposes, and it's important to clarify the purpose before commencing design.  Will your dashboard help to monitor indicators? Will it frame results from a baseline or midline analysis?  What types of decisions will it inform? Will it help the team evaluate and learn from specific activities or events?  Dashboards only display a limited amount of information and having a clear objective for how the dashboard will be used by the team will help focus your design efforts.

2. Know your audience
   Knowing who will use the dashboard is critical to informing its design.  People interact with data differently depending on their roles, responsibilities, and connection to the project.  For example, the Chief of Party might only want a high-level summary of key findings, while the M&E team is likely to want more detail.  Alternatively, a client may have a different perspective you want to consider when designing the dashboard.  PowerBI allows you to design dashboards for various audiences through features like "drill-through," which moves a user from high-level insights to more detailed information.  Knowing what is important to your audience is the best way to ensure their needs are met at each step of the design process.

3. What is the message or story we are trying to communicate?
   Having a clear message, you want to communicate will help guide your dashboard design.  Not every indicator, survey question, or data point is created equal.  Prior to creating a dashboard, it is critical that you do a little exploratory data analysis (EDA) to understand the key insights you ultimately want to communicate in the dashboard.  This message or story should align to your visualization choices, such as maps and other plots.