---
title: Citizen-Centered Design & Frontier Insights in Kabul Municipality
date: 2019-01-15 12:16:00 -05:00
---

The Center for Digital Acceleration is excited to announce that we’re taking the [open-source](https://github.com/munis-transparencia-gobierno-abierto/municipalidad-de-chiantla) transparency & citizen participation app that we developed for Guatemalan municipalities and replicating it for Kabul and four other Afghan municipalities through the [USAID SHAHAR](https://www.dai.com/our-work/projects/afghanistan-strong-hubs-afghan-hope-and-resilience-shahar) project. 
[Photo]
<!--more-->
## Replicating half way around the world
“But how can a tool built for Guatemala work in Afghanistan?” you may ask. This is a fair question given the inherent risks: differences in language, culture, expectations of an interface, and from an institutional standpoint, a totally distinct system of incentives, governance, and decision-making. We view these differences as features of the process as opposed to hindrances; in fact, they are the foundations of our entire approach, which we’re calling [citizen-centered design](https://dai-global-digital.com/citizen-centered-design-guatemala.html). In essence, we’re taking the core architecture from Guatemala, but through our design process, we’re applying an ethnographic lens to develop our understanding of local culture, technology adoption and application, as well as the relationship that citizens have to their local government. 
## Citizen-Centered Design for Afghanistan
[Photo]
First of all, we’ve recruited a dynamite local project manager, who is quick to learn, a skilled networker and a strong relationship manager. Working with him, we’ve mapped the key actors and stakeholders within the SHAHAR project, Kabul Municipality, the Afghan Deputy Ministry of Municipalities (DMM), local civil society, Afghan’s ecosystem of innovators and technology companies, and made contact with each. Subsequently, we carried out Frontier Insights face-to-face research with citizens across 15 of Kabul’s 22 districts, and hosted a design thinking session to bring together our stakeholders, get them to talk to one another, and surface specific ideas for the app’s appearance, content, and functions. With this information, we put together a design proposal that we’ve shared with all the same key actors to get their buy-in and ensure that they feel ownership of the process, and soon we’ll turn that design proposal into a scope of work for a local software developer. That developer will take our open source code from Guatemala and replicate it accordingly. 
## Frontier Insights Kabul
[Photo]
Returning to Frontier Insights, this is a key step in our design approach. It helps us understand how citizens communicate, how they seek and share information, how they use technology, and gives us a sense of how what they think about and expect from their municipal authorities. 
We carried out 120 interviews, of which 70 were men and 50 were women. We made a push for gender equality, which—as we learned—is a challenge in a place where women are less likely to agree to be interviewed in the street, and if so, only by another woman. We accounted for this by building our interview team of half men and half women and while it’s not 50/50, we’re happy with the result. In terms of geographic diversity, we interviewed people in 15 of Kabul’s 22 districts; once again, we didn’t hit them all, but we have broad sample. Is it a scientifically representative sample of everyone in Kabul? No, but keep in mind that Frontier Insights is designed to help us make early decisions in our design process; we’ll keep researching, iterating, and improving our solution throughout the process through our design thinking sessions and user testing. So what did we find? 
## 1. In Kabul, the incidence of both mobile phones and smartphones is high, but not universal
Our 97% of our respondents had a mobile phone of some type or another, and 56% had a smartphone of some type. This gives us confidence that a smartphone app will have an audience, but it also pushes us to think about how an SMS component might complement the app to help the municipality reach those who do not own a smartphone and vice versa. 
<script id="infogram_0_fae6008e-c755-441b-b585-5448aa56028d" title="Type of phone w/ gender" src="https://e.infogram.com/js/dist/embed.js?9RJ" type="text/javascript"></script>
## 2. TV, radio and Facebook are popular sources of news
Among our respondents, almost everyone said that they got their news from television, while about half said that they used the radio and Facebook on their mobile phone to get news. To us, this gives us a sense of how to reach people when we get the promotion stage. It’s also interesting to see Facebook rival radio as the second most popular news source; this is the case in many of the places where we’ve carried out [Frontier Insights](https://dai-global-digital.com/tags/?tag=digital-insights) research, as it is at home in the US. 
<script id="infogram_0_b47d1f5a-a7bd-4386-ae80-9451a9c32a9c" title="How do you get news?" src="https://e.infogram.com/js/dist/embed.js?bCA" type="text/javascript"></script>
## 3. People love Facebook and Viber
We asked our respondents to name their three favorite apps. Unsurprisingly, their favorite app was Facebook, followed by—surprisingly—Viber. In most places we work, WhatsApp is a close second, but in this case it came in third, followed closely by Messenger, Instagram, and (another surprise) imo. Our respondents also reporting using Facebook an average of 77 minutes per day. We’ll be looking for ways to promote our app via Facebook, Viber and Whatsapp, and will look for some simple ways to integrate our app with these social tools as we did in Guatemala, where citizens can share what they find in the budget section to their friends via messaging tools or post them to Facebook. 
<script id="infogram_0_a8bf5dba-7f0d-4eb7-9a97-bc6ce9c7a595" title="Favorite apps" src="https://e.infogram.com/js/dist/embed.js?kc0" type="text/javascript"></script>
## 4. People visit the municipality to pay property tax or get a business license
The property, or safaye, tax was by far the most common reason people mentioned that they visit the municipality, followed by getting a business license, getting an ID and other housing documents. Based on this, we’re exploring the possibility of building in the capability to make safaye payments via our tool, though we’ve been told that the business license process will no longer sit with the municipality, so at we’ll simply provide some information about how to get the license.  
<script id="infogram_0_f9fcda60-4f34-47a0-8d03-da60d2b21d0a" title="Why visit municipality?" src="https://e.infogram.com/js/dist/embed.js?Tw8" type="text/javascript"></script>

## 5. The municipality’s current citizen feedback and request mechanisms need work
Only 29 of the 120 citizens we spoke to have submitted a formal complaint about a local issue (bad roads, trash pick-up, etc…) to their municipality, and of those 29 only 5 felt that their issue had been resolved. As improving citizen engagement is a core objective of the SHAHAR project, we’ll be working with the team that’s helping improve the municipality’s citizen report mechanisms to incorporate the ability to send reports via the app and have them integrate directly to the systems that SHAHAR is building. This will require some effort via service design, but the truth is that SHAHAR is handling the heavy lifting of building the database and enterprise side of the tool, as well as training staff. Our goal is that app-based reports will look the same to municipal staff as reports shared in person, over the phone, or any other way. 
<script id="infogram_0_76f0a6dc-10f1-4907-b074-54d3947c65a4" title="Complaint" src="https://e.infogram.com/js/dist/embed.js?K7J" type="text/javascript"></script>

## Triangulation via design thinking 
[Photo]
We ran these sessions much the same way as the workshops we [facilitated in Guatemala](https://dai-global-digital.com/forking-with-design-thinking-in-guatemala.html) last year, having small groups generate and vote on ideas, present those to the full group, and then having the full group vote on the best ideas. Beyond the opportunity to surface ideas from the bottom-up, we view these sessions as an a chance to have the actors and institutions to meet each other face-to-face and understand each others’ interests and preferences. Like Frontier Insights, none of the suggestions or ideas we collect are definitive; instead we triangulate and put together a draft concept that will pass muster for our own gatekeepers within the SHAHAR project and within the municipality (principally the mayor himself, who is only one voice, but an important one).
[Photo]
In terms of appearance, we’ll need to use the municipality’s current color scheme, dark blue and gold, as a base, but we wanted citizens to make some suggestions for additional colors to use. While this may not seem important, we view it as a simple way to incorporate feedback and ideas from citizens that will be highly visible in the final product, generating ownership. In the end they chose orange and green as accent colors; orange for the color of the vests the municipal employees wear, and green to represent vegetation. Nice colors, but we’ll have to think on how to artfully incorporate them with a base color scheme of blue and gold. 
[Photo]
In terms of content, participants asked us to include municipal contacts, development plans, some information about budgets, some statistics about Kabul, an organizational chart, information on key laws and local ordinances, as well as news updates and information on touristic and historic sites in Kabul. Of course our ability to incorporate this information will hinge on its availability, but we are proposing to include as much of it as we can since most of it is static content that doesn’t require a back-end connection to a database. 
[Photo]
In terms of functions, participants asked for the ability to share reports directly to the municipality, but also to get feedback on their report. They wanted a safaye and business tax calculator, the ability to pay the safaye tax directly, and access to municipal job listings. As mentioned above, we are confident that we’ll be able to integrate the app into the citizen reporting mechanism that SHAHAR is developing for Kabul. We’re also confident that we can do a tax calculator. The municipal job listing will depend on the municipality’s current processes for posting jobs online and if there is already a place where this information is available. As for the safaye payment component, we have seen significant interest in this component also from the mayor’s office, and are exploring the technical challenges involved.  We’ve heard that UN HABITAT is building a database of safaye payments, which we would need to leverage, but we’re not sure when it will be ready, so we may end up pushing this component to a round 2 of development.
## Where to go from here?
Based on the result from Frontier Insights and our design thinking session we’re putting together our design proposal and socializing it with all the key actors. In the next week or so, we hope to have a finalized scope of work, which we’ll use to hire a local software developer and get to work. At the same time, our local project manager is starting his engagement of our four provincial municipalities, where we’ll conduct Frontier Insights and host some design thinking sessions so we can develop their municipal apps as well. We expect to finish the development of the Kabul app and the four provincial apps by October of this year, and possibly earlier, since we are starting with pre-existing source code. We’ll keep you updated on the progress of our process!

*Subscribe to [Digital@DAI](https://dai.us19.list-manage.com/subscribe?u=9cb0638e1f8d7224ba7058efa&id=67e58edf98) for more on the work of DAI’s Center for Digital Acceleration*
