---
title: 'COVID-19 Data Analysis, Part 4: Forecasting Hospital Capacity in Mexico'
date: 2020-04-27 13:45:00 -04:00
---

One of the most important determinants of death rates in a pandemic is hospital capacity rates. The principal reason public health officials have spoken so much about “flattening the curve” is due to the need to reduce hospital burden: when a city, state, or country has a large spike in cases over a short period of time, hospitals will get inundated with moderate to severe cases to the point where doctors must make choices on who receives care. This is the current reality experienced in New York and the tail end of what has transpired in the current wave of cases of Italy and Spain, among other European countries. 
While focus has largely been on these hotspots, large middle-income countries such as Brazil, Mexico, and South Africa have recently suffered a surge in cases. In particular, DAI’s presence in Mexico with the Better Health project of the FCO leads us to ask what health care resources the country has at its disposal. Our national level population risk index suggests that Mexico has a medium level of risk, which makes it an interesting case study for other countries at this level. In this article, we evaluate hospital capacity in Mexico by providing scenario forecasts on bed availability at the subnational level. As such, this article is divided into three parts. First, we provide a brief overview of the Mexican health system and the hospital resources available. Second, we examine hospital capacity forecasting scenarios at the state level based upon the [Harvard Global Public Health Institute’s](https://globalhealth.harvard.edu/) estimates for regions of the United States. In doing so, we estimate a first set of scenarios of hospital occupancy rates using only public hospital resources, and then a second set of scenarios that includes the resources of the private hospital network. Finally, we conclude with some insights and implications of these forecasts.

**A Brief Overview of Mexico’s Health System and Hospital Beds**

According to the [World Health Organization’s Global Health Observatory](https://www.who.int/data/gho/data/indicators/indicator-details/GHO/hospital-beds-(per-10-000-population)), in 2015 Mexico has 15 hospital beds per 10,000 people, which puts it at 119 out of 181 countries in the world for which data is reported. The country has far fewer resources available compared to other countries of North America and also to other Latin American countries of the similar income per capita and population size. In fact, there isn’t a single indicator of the three shown below where Mexico ranks high compared to other countries and [this situation has worsened over the years as the system has been neglected.](https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/the_americas/mexico-coronavirus-hospital-outbreaks-imss-amlo/2020/04/18/e3a4e48e-7f66-11ea-84c2-0792d8591911_story.html)  

XXXX

Mexico is also a low spender in health. In 2018 the share of GDP allocated to health was 5.5%.  For the same year, the OECD average was 8.8%.  Compared to regional benchmarks, Brazil dedicated 9.2% of GDP to health, Chile 8.9% and Colombia 7.2%. As a result of the chronic underspending, most noticeable in the last few years, the hospital sub-system is underequipped and understaffed.   

Mexico’s health system has both a private and public sector. Concerning the latter, there are multiple institutions that serve as payers and providers of coverage, which is largely determined by place of employment. The Mexican Institute of Social Security (IMSS), Mexican Civil Service Social Security and Services Institute (ISSSTE), PEMEX, Secretary of Defense (SEDENA), and the Navy  (SEMAR) all provide services to formal sector workers based on place of employment, while until 2019 the Popular Health Insurance (SPS), Secretary of Health (SSA), State Secretaries of Health (SESA), and IMSS-Bienestar provide services to the uninsured. Nearly half of all spending in health is paid privately by families mostly in out-of-pocket payments to buy drugs, ambulatory services and basic hospitalization.  The private sector is for those with capacity to pay, although it should be noted that many of those without formal benefits resort to utilizing the private sector and paying out of pocket: [one estimate suggests 28% of the uninsured population reported having had their last ambulatory care delivered privately.](https://www.healthaffairs.org/doi/full/10.1377/hlthaff.21.3.47)  

According to [February 2020 data from the Secretary of Health](http://www.dgis.salud.gob.mx/contenidos/intercambio/clues_gobmx.html), there are a total of 120,240  hospital beds  operating public? hospitals in Mexico. Including non-operating hospitals and beds utilized for other purposes, the total increases to 145,544. Either of these numbers suggest an even lower number than the one implied by the previously cited beds per capita rate of the WHO in 2015. 

As the figure below shows, 87% of all hospital beds in operating hospitals are under the IMSS, SSA, and private medical services (SMP) sectors. This corresponds to 30,180 in the SMP-run hospitals, 33,873 beds in IMSS-run hospitals, and 39,318 beds in the SSA-run hospital system. When considering all beds utilized for other purposes in hospitals, the SSA jumps to 55,914, while both the IMSS and SMP slightly increase to 34,310 and 31,284, respectively. It is also interesting to note that although the private system represents roughly a quarter of the hospital beds it has by far the largest number of operating hospitals at 3,303. This corresponds to 70% of the entire system. This discrepancy is largely [explained by the fact that many private hospitals are medium sized](https://www.gob.mx/cms/uploads/attachment/file/239410/ISSM_2016.pdf). Although some private hospitals are large highly specialized (JCI accredited) medical centers that are concentrated in the large cities, most private hospitals are small (0-20 beds) and cater to medium and low income patients and perform low complexity procedures.  

XXXX

How does this correspond to the distribution of the population by service provider? The Mexican health system is characterized by significant distortions, given the peculiar nature of providing entire social security regimes for single employers such as PEMEX, SEDEMA, and SEMAR. These three regimes have significantly more resources than the corresponding percentages of the population with access to them. 
Descriptive statistics based on data from the Health and Nutrition Survey (ENSANUT) of 2018 suggest some distortions related to some of the smaller employment-based systems of the public system. The main system relied upon by the population largely matches the resource distribution of the three largest institutes: 19% of respondents selected the IMSS as their preferred system, 38.81% selected the SSA system and 31.89% selected SMS. 

**Hospital Stress and Scenario Forecasting**

Forecasting hospital occupancy rates is difficult even under normal circumstances, much less in a pandemic. Many assumptions made for this type of forecast are based on estimations of demographic and behavioral health risk factors of greater susceptibility to severe cases. This produces a state of learning on the fly in a scenario where growth is exponential. 

The Harvard Global Institute of Health [estimates for hospital occupancy for regions in the United States](https://globalepidemics.org/our-data/hospital-capacity/) provides a useful methodology, based upon the percentage of the population getting infected over time intervals of 6, 12, and 18 months. Based on data collected by the WHO in Wuhan, they assume 19% hospitalization rate in those under 65 years of age and a 28.5% hospitalization rate for those over 65, with an average hospital stay of 12 days. 

Fitting these assumptions to our model using [INEGI population estimates from 2020](https://www.inegi.org.mx/programas/ccpv/2020/default.html), we then calculate hospital bed availability in both public and private hospitals based on occupancy rates according to the most recent data. This is further explained below. We include the private sector resources given the need many will be forced to rely upon this system. Furthermore, the federal government recently announced an agreement for individuals to utilize the private system. In our first set of scenario forecast scenarios,  we estimate the impact of COVID-19 on hospital occupancy rates at the state level with only beds available in public hospitalswe use a flat 66% hospital occupancy rate for public hospitals . In our second set of scenarios, resources from private hospitals are added into the model. Additionally, in this scenario we also add in hospital beds for hospitals that have been out of operation or are awaiting approval to be put into operation as potentially available beds. This forecast assumes the most optimal utilization of resources of the public and private sectors.    

This analysis has important limitations, in that it does not consider at-risk demographic and behavioral risks or that access to healthcare will not be the same in a highly unequal country such as Mexico. While it does factor in the importance of age of hospital occupants, it does not consider factors such as obesity, respiratory conditions, and other risk factors. While we know these factors are important, no study yet has been able to quantify the increased likelihood of hospitalization for these population subgroups as has been done with age groups. Once these can be properly estimated, we can consider how this may change stress on hospitals in different regions. 

Which scenario is closer to reality? This is unclear as much of it will depend on how the government is able to administer the utilization of the public and private systems. However, given the reliance of low to middle income families on We include the private sector hospitals prior to COVID-19, there is no reason to believe that these resources will not be utilized by the population. Additionally, resources given the need many will be forced to rely upon this system. tFurthermore, the federal government recently announced an agreement for individuals to utilize with the private sector hospitals system to treat non-COVID-19 patients referred by public institutions to depressurize the public sector hospitals. 

This suggests that the forecast including hospital beds of the private sector are a better indication of resources available, although this could be overly optimistic. This model does not consider doctor, nurse and administrative capacity or bandwidth to optimally allocate patients to where hospital beds are available and provide them adequate care once admitted. 

**Baseline Occupancy Rates**

It is not realistic to expect a flat occupancy rate across all hospitals and regions of Mexico, since some states simply have more efficient uses of their hospitals than others. The map below shows hospital occupancy rates for 2017, which are the most recent estimates available.

XXXX




