---
title: 'Promoting Resilient Ecosystems: How Cambodians are Adapting in the Face of
  COVID-19'
date: 2020-04-09 06:00:00 -04:00
---

Five years in Cambodia leading USAID’s Development Innovations project has taught me a lot about innovation. I have seen Cambodian innovators employ entrepreneurial thinking to develop out-of-the-box, creative solutions that solve problems for hundreds of thousands of Cambodians – [automated phone calls warning people of upcoming floods](https://www.development-innovations.org/blog/the-tech-mermaid-alert/) immediately come to mind, as does a [mobile test prep application](https://www.edemy.org/#tesdopi) to help high school students get ready for their national exams. It’s this entrepreneurial thinking that the world desperately needs in this time of hardship, where livelihoods, the economy, and social cohesion are being challenged in unprecedented ways. Which naturally begs the question: In the face of COVID-19, what happens next in Cambodia’s innovation community?

In this new world, trusted local networks and communities are more important than ever. The transition to social distancing and working from home has not been easy: Cambodians – the ones with internet access, at least – have been forced to move much of their lives online. This poses a challenge for Cambodians who are new to the digital world and may need support in developing digital skills and digital literacy. Cambodia’s innovators and tech-enabled CSOs and businesses are critical in this environment and, unsurprisingly, are already developing context-specific programs and solutions to address the outbreak.